# Frequently asked questions #

## Community ##
### Who are we ###
We are a group of people, initially from the companies [DREAMgenics](http://www.dreamgenics.com/) and [Treelogic](http://www.treelogic.com/), open source advocates, working in bioinformatics and software engineering, manifesting and willing to create [this](Manifesto.md).

We expect the previous description to [grow](FAQ#Can_I_participate.md).

### Can I participate ###
Please do. Join our debates in the [project group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/openomics). Keep in mind the [current status of the project](FAQ#What_is_the_current_status_of_the_project.md).

## Project ##
### Is this a pure technological project ###
No, it has cross-disciplinary issues concerning genomics and bioethics.

However, concerns seem to be quite separated, and possibly several subprojects would arise.
### What is the current status of the project ###
**This is what we have now:**
  * A [manifesto](Manifesto.md), defining the objectives and principles of the product and the collaborative project itself
  * Some [preliminary ideas](Documentation.md) for the desired behaviour for the system.
  * A working local (non-scalable) functional prototype.

**This is what is needed:**
  * Expertise. Participation of experts in P2P, distributed databases, security, healthcare public systems, genomic and phenotypic representation standards and bioethics, to evaluate, discuss, improve our initial idea and obtain an optimum high level design.
  * Commitment. Involving potential (non-individual) users of the system from its inception (hospitals, bioinformatic companies, and genomic research labs)

**This is what we are doing now:**
  * Contacting experts from all over the world to form what we are calling the _[Committee Of Experts](FAQ#What_is_the_Committee_of_Experts.md)_.
  * Contacting european companies and organizations (IT, bioethics, hospitals, bioinformatics, and research labs) to form a [consortium](FAQ#What_is_the_H2020_Consortium.md) and make a formal proposal to the EU R&D program (March 2014), Horizon 2020 to get financiation and guarantee the commitment for a few years.

**What is next**
  * Documenting our preliminary ideas and starting the discussion on the public mail list.
  * Keep spreading the project and contacting people.
  * Mature and document the system design.

**And next**
  * Wait impatiently for a favorable Horizon 2020 resolution (late 2014).
  * Structure the project.
  * Share the tasks among participants.
  * Eventually with a mature community, and a funtional codebase reached, make an [Apache Incubator](http://incubator.apache.org/) proposal for the project.

### Why P2P ###
No, we are not talking about a platform allowing illegal activities or piracy (in fact one most important steps in the project is to identify those possible illegal activities and avoid them).
We are talking about a symmetric deployment scheme.

You can find more information about P2P here:
  * [Social peer-to-peer processes (Wikipedia)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_peer-to-peer_processes)
  * [Peer-to-peer (Wikipedia)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer)
  * [Peer-to-peer architectures (RFC 5694)](http://tools.ietf.org/search/rfc5694)
So, why to include a technical issue (P2P-based) as principle of the project?

Because is the only infrastructure where the following principles can be **perpetually guaranteed**:
  * For open use
  * Non propietary
  * Free
  * Equality
  * Cooperation
  * Meritocracy
  * Altruism
Other remarkable advantages are:
  * Zero costs. No dedicated infrastructure or staf needed.
  * Reliability. No downtimes
Of course there are drawbacks too:
  * The complexity of the system to build is (much) higher.
  * Manageability is much harder to achieve.
### What about the Global Alliance ###
The [Global Alliance white paper](http://www.sanger.ac.uk/about/press/assets/130605-white-paper.pdf), describes a wide variety of problems present in bioinformatics today.

`OpenOmics` is centered at two very specific problems: gentoype-phenotype correlation and unification of genomic-based databases. An evolution of `OpenOmics` network to support other applications in the future is also a [main concern](#Is_OpenOmics_only_aimed_at_finding_genotype-phenotype_correlatio.md).


We are contacting many experts of the Global Alliance to join the [Committee Of Experts](FAQ#What_is_the_Committee_of_Experts.md).

Regarding data privacy, `OpenOmics` can also be adopted to serve Global Alliance needs:

**Private data scenario:**

Nowadays, the majority amount of the data generated by hospitals and institutions is under strong privacy and anonimity constraints, determined by the consent originally given by the patient. And of course these data can not be published. These data is the target of the Global Alliance proposal.


**Open network scenario**:

Our perspective is more future-oriented. We want to build an autonomous public collaborative infrastructure where all the public knowledge (knowledge already been publish) about genotype-phenotype relationships could be stored, under the same rules, and also where the end user (data owner, for example the patient himself) could store and share his own genomic and phenotypic information. Since the user of the system is the data owner, the legal, and organizational issues of our scenario are much more simple.

**`OpenOmics` as a comprehensive infrastructure:**

Our project could be used in both scenarios. `OpenOmics` could be deployed on private P2P networks, under strict security protocols according to the Global Alliance needs, and also on a public global network, covering the user-oriented scenario. For more information see the [architectural notes](Documentation#Multitier_topology.md).

Mecanisms of network interconnection could arise, allowing the promotion of certain data to a more public layer (network).

### Is `OpenOmics` only aimed at finding genotype-phenotype correlations ###
As starting point, we are focused at creating this very concrete application. But we are aware of the needs of the bioinformatic community regarding storage, computation, sharing, scalability, security etc. [Generality](http://wiki.answers.com/Q/What_is_generality_in_software_engineering) will be one of the principles governing our evolution, and we think our system could become a comprehensive infrastructure for cooperation covering all the needs of the community in a future.
## H2020 ##
H2020 ([Horizon 2020](http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/what-horizon-2020)) is the biggest EU Research and Innovation programme.
### What is the Committee of Experts ###
The Committee of Experts is an invitational-only, multidisciplinary group of individuals from over the world, aimed at discussing, evaluating, and determining the best approach for the proposed system.
The Committee also plays a key role for a H2020 favorable resolution, since proposals showing collaboration of experts are much more probable of being accepted.

A member of the Committee of Experts is expected to:
  * Participate in the public mail list, as explained before.
  * Invite other experts to join the Committee.
  * Voluntary figure in the H2020 proposal, as an expert advisor.

### What is the H2020 Consortium ###
We are contacting distinct european companies and organizations (IT, bioethics, hospitals, bioinformatics, and research labs) to form a consortium and make a formal proposal to the EU R&D program (March 2014), Horizon 2020 to get financiation.

A favorable resolution (late 2014) would mean many people from the consortium companies would be full-time committed to the project.
<a href='Hidden comment: 
For the time being the following companies and institutions will comprise the Consortium for the proposal:
* [http://www.dreamgenics.com/ DREAMgenics] (Bioinformatics)
* [http://www.treelogic.com/ Treelogic] (Software engineering)
* [http://www.catedraderechoygenomahumano.es/ Inter-University Chair in Law and the Human Genome, Deusto University] (Law and Bioethics)
'></a>
### Does our commitment to the project depend on the H2020 resolution ###
Definitely not. We strongly believe that this project may be of particular importance for humanity.